PROGRESS.md, before:

## Version 1.0
- [x] Language Server scaffolding
- [x] Hover
  - [x] Basic hovering
    - [x] Functions
    - [x] Methods
    - [x] Identifiers
    - [x] Kwargs
  - [x] Limited docs on hover
  - [x] Improve docs on functions/methods regarding arguments and return types
- [x] Symbol resolving
- [x] Basic diagnostics
- [x] Type definitions for all modules/builtins
  - [x] Functions
  - [x] Builtin objects
  - [x] Modules
    - [x] CMake
    - [x] CUDA
    - [x] Dlang
    - [x] External Project
    - [x] Filesystem
    - [x] GNOME
    - [x] Hotdoc
    - [x] i18n
    - [x] Icestorm
    - [x] Java
    - [x] Keyval
    - [x] Python 3
    - [x] Python
    - [x] Qt4
    - [x] Qt5
    - [x] Qt6
    - [x] Simd
    - [x] SourceSet
    - [x] Rust
    - [x] Wayland
    - [x] Windows
- [x] Formatting
- [x] Symboltree
- [x] Rudimentary autocompletion
## Version 2.0
- [ ] Full autocompletion
- [ ] More diagnostics
- [ ] Full Wrap/Subproject support
- [ ] Highlighting
- [x] Cache tree from tree-sitter (And the AST that is generated from the tree-sitter tree!)
- [x] More tests
- [x] VSCode Extension (Just a fork of vscode-meson currently)
## Version 3.0
- [ ] Renaming
- [ ] Code actions
- [ ] Autogenerate type definitions from JSON (Requires upstream work)

Commit message:

Move typechecking of arguments to 3.0.
This depends on generating type definitions from JSON, as otherwise the amount
of false positives would be quite high.

PROGRESS.md, after:

## Version 1.0
- [x] Language Server scaffolding
- [x] Hover
  - [x] Basic hovering
    - [x] Functions
    - [x] Methods
    - [x] Identifiers
    - [x] Kwargs
  - [x] Limited docs on hover
  - [x] Improve docs on functions/methods regarding arguments and return types
- [x] Symbol resolving
- [x] Basic diagnostics
- [x] Type definitions for all modules/builtins
  - [x] Functions
  - [x] Builtin objects
  - [x] Modules
    - [x] CMake
    - [x] CUDA
    - [x] Dlang
    - [x] External Project
    - [x] Filesystem
    - [x] GNOME
    - [x] Hotdoc
    - [x] i18n
    - [x] Icestorm
    - [x] Java
    - [x] Keyval
    - [x] Python 3
    - [x] Python
    - [x] Qt4
    - [x] Qt5
    - [x] Qt6
    - [x] Simd
    - [x] SourceSet
    - [x] Rust
    - [x] Wayland
    - [x] Windows
- [x] Formatting
- [x] Symboltree
- [x] Rudimentary autocompletion
## Version 2.0
- [ ] Full autocompletion
- [ ] More diagnostics
- [ ] Full Wrap/Subproject support
- [ ] Highlighting
- [x] Cache tree from tree-sitter (And the AST that is generated from the tree-sitter tree!)
- [x] More tests
- [x] VSCode Extension (Just a fork of vscode-meson currently)
## Version 3.0
- [ ] Renaming
- [ ] Code actions
- [ ] Typechecking of arguments (Depends on generating of type definitions from JSON)
- [ ] Autogenerate type definitions from JSON (Requires upstream work)
